---
id: 615
title: Field Seminar B 2009-2010, Weeks 8-9
date: 2009-11-18T15:35:16+00:00
author: Ken
layout: single
guid: http://www.kenbenoit.net/?p=615
permalink: /posts/field-seminar-b-2009-2010-weeks-8-9/
categories:
  - Field Seminar
---
**Week 8: The impact of referendums (MG)**


  Lawrence LeDuc, T_he Politics of Global Democracy: referendums in global perspective_. Peterborough Ontario: Broadview Press, 2003



  Matt Qvortrup, A_ Comparative Study of Referendums: Government by the People_, 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2005).



  Claes De Vreese (ed), _The Dynamics of Referendum Campaigns: an international perspective_ (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007)



  Maija Setala, _Referendums and Democratic Government: normative theory and the analysis of institutions_ (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999)



  Svensson, Palle (2002), Five Danish Referendums on the European Community and European Union: A Critical Assessment of the Franklin Thesis _European Journal of Political Research_ 41/5: 733"50.
 <em></em>



  _Further reading:_



  Bowler, Shaun and Todd Donovan (1998), _Demanding Choices: Opinion, Voting, and Direct Democracy_ (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press). Overview of the USA experience.



  Darcy, R. and Michael Laver (1990), Referendum Dynamics and the Irish Divorce Amendment, _Public Opinion Quarterly_ 54/1: 1-20.



  de Vreese, Claes H. (2006), Political Parties in Dire Straits? Consequences of National Referendums for Political Parties, _Party Politics_ 12/5: 581-98.



  Lupia, Arthur and Richard Johnston (2001), Are Voters to Blame? Voter Competence and Elite Maneuvers in Referendums, in Matthew Mendelsohn and Andrew Parkin (eds), _Referendum Democracy: Citizens, Elites  and Deliberation in Referendum Campaigns_ (Basingstoke: Palgrave). (2001), 191-210.



  Marthaler, Sally (2005), The French Referendum on Ratification of the EU Constitutional Treaty, 29 May 2005, _Representation_ 41/3: 230-9.



  Michael Gallagher and Pier Vincenzo Uleri (eds), T_he Referendum Experience in Europe._ Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1996.


**Week 9: Electoral Behaviour I: The Dependent Variable (MM)**


  Cees van der Eijk et al, 'Rethinking the dependent variable in voting behavior: On the measurement and analysis of electoral utilities', _Electoral Studies_ 2006, 25(3): 424-47<strong></strong>



  Guy Whitten and Harvey Palmer  'Heightening Comparativists' concern  for model choice', _American Journal of Political Science_, vol 40(1) 1996: 231-60



  _See also:_



  Wouter van der Brug et al _The Economy and the Vote._ Cambridge UnIversity Press, 2008, esp pp. 31-53.



  Michael Marsh 'Stability and change in structure of electoral competition 1989-2002' in, editor(s)Diane Payne, John Garry and Niamh Hardiman , _Irish social and political attitudes_, Liverpool, Liverpool University Press, 2006, pp94 &#8211; 111, [see [http://www.tcd.ie/ines](http://www.tcd.ie/ines)]
