---
id: 951
title: EUI Multi-Level Models Course
date: 2011-05-23T08:26:21+00:00
author: Ken
layout: single

permalink: /mlm/
categories:
  - Course-related
  - Statistics
---
## An Introduction to Multi-Level Models (Using Stata)

European University Institute, May 23–27, 2011
  
Professor Kenneth Benoit
  
Methodology Institute, London School of Economics
  
<http://www.kenbenoit.net/mlm/>

[**Course handout** here](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_EUI_2011_handout.pdf).

**Readings** are available from Mark Franklin&#8217;s Dropbox account for this course. If you are not yet subscribed, then email mark at <Mark.Franklin@EUI.eu>.

**Day 1: [Introduction and Motivation for multi-level models](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_day1.pdf).**

  * **Required Reading**: Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal (2008, Chs. 1–2); Stata manual for reshape.
  * **Recommended Reading**: Franzese (2005); Gelman (2006); Austin, Goel & van Walraven (2001).
  * **[Homework 1](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_homework_day1.pdf "MLM Homework 1")** and **[Homework 1 Answer code](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_homework_day1_answers.do)**.

**Day 2: [Estimating models with multi-level data](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_day2.pdf).**

  * **Required Reading**: Continue with Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal (2008, Chs. 1–2) and Stata [XT] manual.
  * **Recommended Reading**: Steenbergen & Jones (2002); Austin, Goel & van Walraven (2001); Snijders & Bosker (1999); Goldstein (2003).
  * **Homework 2:** Question 2.3 from p87 of Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal. Use xtmixed for part 2.3.2. **[Homework 2 Answer code](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_homework_day2_answers.do).**

**Day 3: [Random-intercept models](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_day3.pdf).**

  * **Required Reading**: Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal (2008, Ch. 3).
  * **Recommended Reading**: Austin, Goel & van Walraven (2001); Snijders & Bosker (1999).
  * **Homework 3**: Question 3.2 from pp133-4 of R-H&S, plus:
  
    5. Compare a &#8220;random effects&#8221;, &#8220;fixed effects&#8221; (using the &#8220;fe&#8221; option to xtreg), and &#8220;between effects&#8221; regression by running them and discussing the differences on the estimated coefficient on the &#8220;deprive&#8221; variable, including the student-level covariates as in part 3 of the question.
  
    **[Homework 3 Answer code](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_homework_day3_answers.do).**

**Day 4: [Random-coefficient models](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_day4.pdf).**

  * **Required Reading**: Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal (2008, Ch. 4)
  * **Recommended Reading**: Austin, Goel & van Walraven (2001); Snijders & Bosker (1999)
  * **Homework 4:** No pre-assigned homework today, although we will go through an example together in class that I will post on-line on the morning of Day 5.

**Day 5: [Extensions of the multi-level model](/assets/courses/mlm2011/MLM_day5.pdf)**

  * **[Random intercept (xtlogit) example from class](/assets/courses/mlm2011/day5classcode.do)** (.do file)**.**
  * **Required Reading**: Continue with Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal (2008, Chs. 6, 9)
  * **Recommended Reading**: McMahon & Heath (1992)

